# Code Generation

`harp.toolkit` can be used to automatically generate firmware and interface code from device and IO pin configuration metadata files.

## Editing device metadata

1. Install [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)
2. Install the [YAML extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml).

The device interface can be described using a `device.yml` file. A complete specification of all device registers, including bit masks, group masks, and payload formats needs to be provided.

```yaml
%YAML 1.1
---
# yaml-language-server: $schema=https://harp-tech.org/draft-02/schema/device.json
device: DeviceName
whoAmI: 0000
firmwareVersion: "0.1"
hardwareTargets: "0.0"
registers:
  DigitalInputs:
    address: 32
    type: U8
    access: Event
```

## Generating device interface code

A complete reactive interface to communicate with the device can be generated from the `device.yml` metadata file.

```ps1
dotnet harp.toolkit generate interface
```

The following options are available to configure the generated output.

#### Namespace
```ps1
-ns, --namespace <ns>
```

Specifies the namespace for the generated code. The default namespace is `Harp.DeviceName` where `DeviceName` is the name of the device specified in the `device.yml` file.

#### Output location
```ps1
-o, --output <o>
```

Specifies the location where to place the generated output. The default is the current directory. Usually this will point to the folder of your `.csproj` interface project.

## Generating device firmware code

Device firmware interface stubs can be generated by providing an additional metadata file, `ios.yml`, describing IO pin configuration. Currently only the [Harp Core ATxmega](https://harp-tech.org/core.atxmega/) is supported.

```ps1
dotnet harp.toolkit generate firmware
```

The following options are available to configure the generated output.

#### Generate implementation stubs
```ps1
--implementation
```

Specifies whether to generate implementation stubs. In general this should be run only when starting development of a new device, to provide templates for all required functions. It should also be run when significantly changing the device metadata file, to ensure alignment between firmware and device interface naming conventions.

#### Output location
```ps1
-o, --output <o>
```

Specifies the location where to place the generated output. The default is the current directory. Usually this will point to the folder of your `.cproj` firmware project.

## Generating device metadata

The device metadata and IO pin configuration files can be generated from legacy XLS worksheet files describing the device. Both the `device.yml` and `ios.yml` will be generated from a single `registers.xls` file.

```ps1
dotnet harp.toolkit generate metadata <registers.xls>
```

#### Output location
```ps1
-o, --output <o>
```

Specifies the location where to place the generated output. The default is the current directory.

> [!Warning]
> The `registers.xls` file format is deprecated and is no longer recommended for editing device metadata as it lacks important features of the new YAML format, including complex payload spec formats and mixed access registers.
